The NE Text Editor
------------------

Copyright (c) 2024 University of Cambridge

This version of NE should run on all Unix-like systems. It should just be a
matter of typing

./configure
make
make install

NE uses Terminfo features when running in screen mode. It can be configured to
use the older Termcap system by running

./configure --enable-termcap

NE makes use of the PCRE library for regular expression matching. From release
3.10 it uses PCRE2 (versions 10.xx). You can, however, revert to using the
obsolete PCRE1 library by running

./configure --disable-pcre2

The final NE-specific "configure" option is

./configure --disable-vdiscard

This is provided for use in environments where the VDISCARD flag for terminal
handling is not defined.

TESTING
-------

Running "make test" runs a number of tests. Most are non-interactive and should
run in any environment. There are some that test screen editing in a
non-interactive way, and one that uses a special mechanism to simulate
interactive screen editing, but this is skipped unless the current terminal is
an xterm window.

UNINSTALLING
------------

Running "make uninstall" removes the files that are installed by "make
install", which are the ne binary and the ne man page.


HISTORY
-------

E was a text editor that ran on a variety of hardware and under a variety of
operating systems. The first implementation was written BCPL to run under
Phoenix/MVS on IBM mainframes. There was a complete re-write in C in the early
1990s, undertaken because BCPL was no longer widely available. The program no
longer ran under MVS, and was renamed NE. It still ran on several other
operating systems, including MSDOS and Acorn's RISC OS. There are still
vestiges of these past glories in the way the code is organized and in some of
the conditional compilation macros.

Recent versions are the result of a big tidy-up to make the Unix-like version
buildable in the standard "configure/make/make install" manner. The code has
been tested only on Unix-like systems (most recently Linux), and the code for
other environments has been gradually stripped out.

February 2011: There has been a lot of hacking about to add the -widechars
(that is, UTF-8) feature. I would have done it rather differently if I had been
including this from the start. As it is, I chose to avoid too much disturbance
at the cost of some potential elegance.

January 2016: More tidying, mainly converting lots of integer variables to
unsigned integers to get rid of compiler warnings. Some more interfaces that
are not relevant in Unix-like systems were removed. There is still lots of
tidying that could be done.

December 2022 - February 2023: Another big tidying of the code, and improvement
of the tests using coverage checking. Some minor updates.

See the doc/ChangeLog file for a list of changes in the various releases.

Philip Hazel
Email local part: Philip.Hazel
Email domain: gmail.com
May 2024


LICENCE
-------

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple
Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111 USA.

--
