.TH NE 1 "05 May 2023" "NE 3.21"
.SH NAME
NE - a text editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ne [options] [source file(s)] [options]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.rs
.sp
NE is a text editor that dates from the early 1990s. In the past it ran on a
number of operating systems, but the current version supports only Unix-like
systems. The main use of NE is expected to be as an interactive screen editor.
However, it can also function as a line-by-line editor, and it is programmable,
so it can be run non-interactively as a text manipulation tool.

NE can process data files in three ways: as single-byte characters (the
default), as UTF-8 multi-byte characters, or as binary bytes displayed and
edited mainly in hexadecimal.

NE is a re-implementation of a previous editor that was called E, which in turn
evolved from one called Zed and a number of predecessors that ran on IBM
mainframes. The lineage can be traced back to some very early Cambridge text
editors of the 1960s that ran on Titan (a prototype Atlas 2) and earlier on
EDSAC 2.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.rs
Options may be given before or after source file names on the command line.
.TP 10
\fB-binary\fP \fB-b\fP
Run in binary mode.
.TP
\fB-from\fP \fI<files>\fP
The option name \fB-from\fP can be omitted. Up to 50 file names are permitted.
A single hyphen indicates the standard input.
.TP
\fB--help\fP \fB-help\fP \fB-h\fP
Show a list of options and then exit.
.TP
\fB-id\fP
Show the current version and then exit.
.TP
\fB-line\fP
Run in line-by-line mode.
.TP
\fB-noinit\fP
Do not obey the caller's \fB.nerc\fP file.
.TP
\fB-notabs\fP
Do not treat tabs specially. (See other tab options below.)
.TP
\fB-notraps\fP
Disable crash traps (for debugging).
.TP
\fB-o\fP \fI<file>\fP
Synonym for \fB-to\fP (see below).
.TP
\fB-opt\fP \fI<string>\fP
Supply an initial line of editing commands.
.TP
\fB-readonly\fP \fB-r\fP
Start in readonly mode.
.TP
\fB-tabin\fP
Expand tabs in input lines, do not retab on output.
.TP
\fB-tabout\fP
Use tabs in all output lines.
.TP
\fB-tabs\fP
Expand tabs in input lines, and retab those lines on output. This is the
default unless overridden by the NETABS environment variable.
.TP
\fB-to\fP \fI<file>\fP
Specify the output for the first input file. The default is to overwrite the
input, and this is true for all other input files (though output destinations
can be changed while editing).
.TP
\fB-ver\fP \fI<file>\fP
Specify the output file for editing verifications when in line-by-line or
non-interactive mode.
.TP
\fB--version\fP \fB-version\fP \fB-v\fP
Show the current version number and then exit.
.TP
\fB-widechars\fP \fB-w\fP
Recognize UTF-8 characters in data and command lines.
.TP
\fB-with\fP \fI<file>\fP
Read editing commands from this file.
.TP
\fB-withkeys\fP \fI<file>\fP
This debugging option simulates keystrokes for testing screen editing. The file
contains an encoding of the required keystrokes.
.TP
\fB-wks\fP \fI<number>\fP
Specify a delay for use with \fB-withkeys\fP,
.
.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.rs
.sp
The environment variable NETABS may be set to one of the words "notabs",
"tabs", "tabin", "tabout", or "tabinout" to set a default tab processing state.
Unless \fB-noinit\fP is given, a list of initial NE commands to obey is read
from the file named in the NERC environment variable, or, if that is not set,
from the file called \fB.nerc\fP in the user's home directory.
.
.
.SH "FURTHER INFORMATION"
.rs
.sp
The NE manual gives a full description of the program and the features that
it provides.
.
.
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS AND RETURN CODES"
.rs
.sp
Error messages are written to the standard error stream. The return code is 0
for success, 4 for warnings, 8 for errors, 12 for serious errors, and 16 for
disasters (a little bit of IBM history here).
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.rs
.sp
.nf
Philip Hazel
Cambridge, England.
.fi
.
.
.SH REVISION
.rs
.sp
.nf
Last updated: 05 May 2023
Copyright (c) 2023 Philip Hazel
.fi
